    Origins
    Main article: Tolstoy family
    The Tolstoys were a well-known family of old Russian nobility who
traced their ancestry to a mythical nobleman named Indris described
by Pyotr Tolstoy as arriving "from Nemec, from the lands of Caesar" to
Chernigov in 1353 along with his two sons Litvinos (or Litvonis) and
Zimonten (or Zigmont) and a druzhina of 3000 people. While the word
"Nemec" has been long used to describe Germans only, at that time it
was applied to any foreigner who didn't speak Russian (from the word
nemoy meaning mute). Indris was then converted to Eastern Orthodoxy,
under the name of Leonty, and his sons as Konstantin and Feodor.
Konstantin's grandson Andrei Kharitonovich was nicknamed Tolstiy
(translated as fat) by Vasily II of Moscow after he moved from Chernigov
to Moscow.

    Because of the pagan names and the fact that Chernigov at the time
was ruled by Demetrius I Starshy some researchers concluded that they were
Lithuanians who arrived from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. At the same time,
no mention of Indris was ever found in the 14th-to-16th-century documents,
while the Chernigov Chronicles used by Pyotr Tolstoy as a reference were lost.
The first documented members of the Tolstoy family also lived during the 17th
century, thus Pyotr Tolstoy himself is generally considered the founder of the
noble house, being granted the title of count by Peter the Great.

    Life and career

    Tolstoy was born at Yasnaya Polyana, a family estate 12 kilometres (7.5 mi)
southwest of Tula, Russia, and 200 kilometres (120 mi) south of Moscow. He was
the fourth of five children of Count Nikolai Ilyich Tolstoy (1794–1837), a
veteran of the Patriotic War of 1812, and Countess Mariya Tolstaya
(née Volkonskaya; 1790–1830). His mother died when he was two and his father when
he was nine.[18] Tolstoy and his siblings were brought up by relatives. In 1844,
he began studying law and oriental languages at Kazan University, where teachers
described him as "both unable and unwilling to learn". Tolstoy left the university
in the middle of his studies, returned to Yasnaya Polyana and then spent much
time in Moscow, Tula and Saint Petersburg, leading a lax and leisurely lifestyle.
He began writing during this period, including his first novel Childhood,
a fictitious account of his own youth, which was published in 1852. In 1851, after
running up heavy gambling debts, he went with his older brother to the Caucasus and
joined the army. Tolstoy served as a young artillery officer during the Crimean War
and was in Sevastopol during the 11-month-long siege of Sevastopol in 1854–55,
including the Battle of the Chernaya. During the war he was recognised for his courage
and promoted to lieutenant. He was appalled by the number of deaths involved
in warfare, and left the army after the end of the Crimean War.

    His experience in the army, and two trips around Europe in 1857 and 1860–61
converted Tolstoy from a dissolute and privileged society author to a non-violent and
spiritual anarchist. Others who followed the same path were Alexander Herzen,
Mikhail Bakunin and Peter Kropotkin. During his 1857 visit, Tolstoy witnessed a public
execution in Paris, a traumatic experience that marked the rest of his life. In a
letter to his friend Vasily Botkin, Tolstoy wrote:
"The truth is that the State is a conspiracy designed not only to exploit, but
above all to corrupt its citizens ... Henceforth, I shall never serve any
government anywhere." Tolstoy's concept of non-violence or ahimsa was bolstered
when he read a German version of the Tirukkural. He later instilled the concept in
Mahatma Gandhi through his A Letter to a Hindu when young Gandhi corresponded with
him seeking his advice.

    His European trip in 1860–61 shaped both his political and literary development
when he met Victor Hugo. Tolstoy read Hugo's newly finished Les Misérables.
The similar evocation of battle scenes in Hugo's novel and Tolstoy's War and Peace
indicates this influence. Tolstoy's political philosophy was also influenced
by a March 1861 visit to French anarchist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, then living in
exile under an assumed name in Brussels. Tolstoy reviewed Proudhon's forthcoming
publication, La Guerre et la Paix ("War and Peace" in French), and later used
the title for his masterpiece. The two men also discussed education, as Tolstoy
wrote in his educational notebooks: "If I recount this conversation with Proudhon,
it is to show that, in my personal experience, he was the only man who understood
the significance of education and of the printing press in our time."

    Fired by enthusiasm, Tolstoy returned to Yasnaya Polyana and founded 13
schools for the children of Russia's peasants, who had just been emancipated from
serfdom in 1861. Tolstoy described the schools' principles in his 1862 essay
"The School at Yasnaya Polyana".[24] His educational experiments were short-lived,
partly due to harassment by the Tsarist secret police. However, as a direct
forerunner to A.S. Neill's Summerhill School, the school at Yasnaya Polyana
can justifiably be claimed the first example of a coherent theory of democratic education.

